Author "Async Closures MVP: Call for Testing!" (#1377)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/inside-rust/2024-08-09-async-closures-call-for-testing.md

---
layout: post
title: "Async Closures MVP: Call for Testing!"
author: Michael Goulet
team: The Async Working Group <https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/wgs/wg-async>
---

The async working group is excited to announce that [RFC 3668] "Async Closures" was recently approved by the Lang team. In this post, we want to briefly motivate why they exist, explain their current shortcomings, and most importantly, announce a call for testing them on nightly Rust.

## The backstory

> Async closures were originally proposed in [RFC 2394](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/2394-async_await.html#async--closures) which introduced `async`/`await` to the language. Simple handling of async closures has existed since async-await was implemented [soon thereafter](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/51580), but until recently async closures simply desugared into closures that returned async blocks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Async closures were originally proposed in [RFC 2394](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/2394-async_await.html#async--closures) which introduced `async`/`await` to the language. Simple handling of async closures has existed in nightly since async-await was implemented [soon thereafter](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/51580), but until recently async closures simply desugared into closures that returned async blocks:
```

```rust
let x = async || {};

> // ...is just sugar for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// ...was just sugar for:
```

let x = || { async {} };
```

> This had a fundamental limitation that it's impossible to express a closure that returns a future that borrows captured state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This had a fundamental limitation that it was impossible to express a closure that returns a future that borrows captured state.
```

Somewhat relatedly, on the callee side, when users want to take an async closure as an argument, they must express that as a bound of two different generic types, or use boxing:

```rust
fn async_callback<F, Fut>(callback: F)
where
    F: FnOnce() -> Fut,
    Fut: Future<Output = String>;

// Or:
fn async_callback_boxed<F, Fut>(callback: F)
where
    F: FnOnce() -> Pin<Box<dyn Future<Output = String>>>;
```

> This led to an additional limitation, that it's impossible to express higher ranked async fn bounds without boxing, since a higher ranked trait bound on `F` cannot lead to a higher-ranked type for `Fut`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This led to an additional limitation, that it's impossible to express higher-ranked async fn bounds without boxing, since a higher-ranked trait bound on `F` cannot lead to a higher-ranked type for `Fut`.
```

(Or it could go the other way.)

These limitations were detailed in [Niko's blog post on async closures and lending](https://smallcultfollowing.com/babysteps/blog/2023/05/09/giving-lending-and-async-closures/#async-closures-are-a-lending-pattern), and later in compiler-errors's blog post on [why async closures are the way they are](https://hackmd.io/@compiler-errors/async-closures).

## OK, so how does [RFC 3668] help?

> Recent [implementation work](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/120361) has focused on reimplementing async closures to be lending, and to design a set of async fn traits to use in parallel. While async closures already existed as syntax, it introduced a new family of async fn traits which are implemented by async closures (and all other callable types which return futures), and which can be written like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recent [work](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/120361) has focused on reimplementing async closures to be lending and designing a set of async fn traits. While async closures already existed as syntax, this work introduced a new family of async fn traits which are implemented by async closures (and all other callable types which return futures). They can be written like:
```

```rust
fn test<F>(callback: F)
where
    // Either:
    async Fn(Arg, Arg) -> Ret

>     // or:

Author: ```suggestion
    // Or:
```

>     async Fn(Arg, Arg) -> Ret
>     // Or:
>     AsyncFn(Arg, Arg) -> Ret

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    async Fn(Arg, Arg) -> Ret,
    // Or:
    AsyncFn(Arg, Arg) -> Ret,
```

```

(It's currently an [open question](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/128129) exactly how to spell this bound, so both syntaxes are implemented in parallel.)

RFC 3668 motivates this implementation work in detail, confirming that we need first-class async closures and async fn traits which allow us to express the *lending* capability of async closures -- read the RFC if you're interested in the whole story!

## So how do I help?

> We'd love for you to test out these new features! First, on a recently-updated nightly compiler, enable the `#![feature(async_closure)]` (the feature is not pluralized).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'd love for you to test out these new features! First, on a recently-updated nightly compiler, enable `#![feature(async_closure)]` (note that, for historical reasons, this feature name is not pluralized).
```

> For Rust users, in general, async closures are designed to be drop-in compatible with closures returning async blocks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Async closures are designed to be drop-in compatible (in almost all cases) with closures returning async blocks:
```

```rust
// Instead of writing:
takes_async_callback(|arg| async {
    // Do things here...
});

// Write this:
takes_async_callback(async |arg| {
    // Do things here...
});
```

> And on the callee side, users should write async fn trait bounds instead of writing "regular" fn trait bounds that return futures:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And on the callee side, write async fn trait bounds instead of writing "regular" fn trait bounds that return futures:
```

```rust
// Instead of writing:
fn doesnt_exactly_take_an_async_closure<F, Fut>()
where
    F: FnOnce() -> Fut,
    Fut: Future<Output = String>
{ todo!() }

// Write this:
fn takes_an_async_closure<F: async FnOnce() -> String>() { todo!() }

> // or this:

Author: ```suggestion
// Or this:
```

fn takes_an_async_closure<F: AsyncFnOnce() -> String>() { todo!() }

> ```

Author: Show an example of rewriting `Fn(&T) -> Box<dyn Future + '_>` to a higher ranked async fn bound

## Shortcomings interacting with the async ecosystem

> If you're going to try to rewrite your async projects, there are a few shortcomings you may want to be aware of.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're going to try to rewrite your async projects, there are a few shortcomings to be aware of.
```

When you name an async callable bound with the *old* style, before first-class async fn trait bounds, then as a side-effect of needing to use two type parameters, you can put additional bounds (e.g. `+ Send` or `+ 'static`) on the `Future` part of the bound, like:

```rust
fn async_callback<F, Fut>()
where
    F: FnOnce() -> Fut,
    Fut: Future<Output = String> + Send + 'static
{ todo!() }
```

There isn't currently a way to put similar bounds on the future returned by calling an async closure, so if you need to constrain your callback futures like this, then you won't be able to use async closures just yet.

We expect to support this in the medium/long term via a [return-type-notation syntax](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/3668-async-closures.html#interaction-with-return-type-notation-naming-the-future-returned-by-calling).

### Subtle differences in closure signature inference

Passing an async closure to a generic `impl Fn(A, B) -> C` bound may not always eagerly infer the closure's arguments to `A` and `B`, leading to strange type errors on occasion. For an example of this, see [`rust-lang/rust#127781`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/127781).

> We expect to improve async closure signature inference moving forward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We expect to improve async closure signature inference as we move forward.
```

### Async closures can't be coerced to `fn()` pointers

Some libraries take their callbacks as function *pointers* (`fn()`) rather than generics. Async closures don't currently implement the same coercion from closure to `fn() -> ...`. Some libraries may mitigate this problem by adapting their API to take generic `impl Fn()` instead of `fn()` pointers as an argument.

> We don't expect to implement this coercion unless there's a particularly good reason to support, since they can always be replaced with an inner function item.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We don't expect to implement this coercion unless there's a particularly good reason to support it, since this can always be handled manually by the caller with an inner function item.
```

## The backstory

Async closures were originally proposed in [RFC 2394](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/2394-async_await.html#async--closures) which introduced `async`/`await` to the language. Simple handling of async closures has existed in nightly since async-await was implemented [soon thereafter](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/51580), but until recently async closures simply desugared into closures that returned async blocks:

```rust
let x = async || {};

// ...was just sugar for:
let x = || { async {} };
```

This had a fundamental limitation that it was impossible to express a closure that returns a future that borrows captured state.

Somewhat relatedly, on the callee side, when users want to take an async closure as an argument, they must express that as a bound of two different generic types, or use boxing:

```rust
fn async_callback<F, Fut>(callback: F)
where
    F: FnOnce() -> Fut,
    Fut: Future<Output = String>;

// Or:
fn async_callback_boxed<F, Fut>(callback: F)
where
    F: FnOnce() -> Pin<Box<dyn Future<Output = String>>>;
```

> This led to an additional limitation, that it's impossible to express higher-ranked async fn bounds without boxing, since a higher-ranked trait bound on `F` cannot lead to a higher-ranked type for `Fut`.

Reviewer 3: Is there a simple canonical example we can use here?

Author: b75327c adds an example, but I don't really want this blog post to be bogged down by "here's what DOESN'T compile today on stable" examples.

Async closures were originally proposed in [RFC 2394](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/2394-async_await.html#async--closures) which introduced `async`/`await` to the language. Simple handling of async closures has existed in nightly since async-await was implemented [soon thereafter](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/51580), but until recently async closures simply desugared into closures that returned async blocks:

```rust
let x = async || {};

// ...was just sugar for:
let x = || { async {} };
```

This had a fundamental limitation that it was impossible to express a closure that returns a future that borrows captured state.

Somewhat relatedly, on the callee side, when users want to take an async closure as an argument, they typically express that as a bound of two different generic types:

```rust
fn async_callback<F, Fut>(callback: F)
where
    F: FnOnce() -> Fut,
    Fut: Future<Output = String>;
```

This also led to an additional limitation that it's impossible to express higher-ranked async fn bounds using this without boxing (since a higher-ranked trait bound on `F` cannot lead to a higher-ranked type for `Fut`), leading to unnecessary allocations:

```rust

> fn async_callback<F, Fut>(callback: F)

Author: ```suggestion
fn async_callback<F>(callback: F)
```

---
layout: post
title: "Async Closures MVP: Call for Testing!"
author: Michael Goulet
team: The Async Working Group <https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/wgs/wg-async>
---

The async working group is excited to announce that [RFC 3668] "Async Closures" was recently approved by the Lang team. In this post, we want to briefly motivate why async closures exist, explain their current shortcomings, and most importantly, announce a call for testing them on nightly Rust.

## The backstory

Async closures were originally proposed in [RFC 2394](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/2394-async_await.html#async--closures) which introduced `async`/`await` to the language. Simple handling of async closures has existed in nightly since async-await was implemented [soon thereafter](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/51580), but until recently async closures simply desugared into closures that returned async blocks:

```rust
let x = async || {};

// ...was just sugar for:
let x = || { async {} };
```

This had a fundamental limitation that it was impossible to express a closure that returns a future that borrows captured state.

> Somewhat relatedly, on the callee side, when users want to take an async closure as an argument, they must express that as a bound of two different generic types, or use boxing:

Author: ```suggestion
Somewhat relatedly, on the callee side, when users want to take an async closure as an argument, they typically express that as a bound of two different generic types:
```

```rust
fn async_callback<F, Fut>(callback: F)
where
    F: FnOnce() -> Fut,
    Fut: Future<Output = String>;

> 
> // Or:
> fn async_callback_boxed<F, Fut>(callback: F)
> where
>     F: FnOnce() -> Pin<Box<dyn Future<Output = String>>>;

Author: ```suggestion
```

```

> This led to an additional limitation, that it's impossible to express higher-ranked async fn bounds using this without boxing (since a higher-ranked trait bound on `F` cannot lead to a higher-ranked type for `Fut`), leading to unnecessary allocations:

Author: ```suggestion
This also led to an additional limitation that it's impossible to express higher-ranked async fn bounds using this without boxing (since a higher-ranked trait bound on `F` cannot lead to a higher-ranked type for `Fut`), leading to unnecessary allocations:
```

We expect to support this in the medium/long term via a [return-type-notation syntax](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/3668-async-closures.html#interaction-with-return-type-notation-naming-the-future-returned-by-calling).

### Subtle differences in closure signature inference

Passing an async closure to a generic `impl Fn(A, B) -> C` bound may not always eagerly infer the closure's arguments to `A` and `B`, leading to strange type errors on occasion. For an example of this, see [`rust-lang/rust#127781`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/127781).

We expect to improve async closure signature inference as we move forward.

### Async closures can't be coerced to `fn()` pointers

Some libraries take their callbacks as function *pointers* (`fn()`) rather than generics. Async closures don't currently implement the same coercion from closure to `fn() -> ...`. Some libraries may mitigate this problem by adapting their API to take generic `impl Fn()` instead of `fn()` pointers as an argument.

> We don't expect to implement this coercion unless there's a particularly good reason to support it, since this can usually be handled manually by the caller by using an inner function item, or by using an `Fn` bound instead: for example:

Author: ```suggestion
We don't expect to implement this coercion unless there's a particularly good reason to support it, since this can usually be handled manually by the caller by using an inner function item, or by using an `Fn` bound instead, for example:
```
